K. 1426 / 7th century CE (Oc Eo, An Giang Province, Vietnam)

Stela found during excavation in Oc Eo archaeological site (An Giang Province, Vietnam).

Photos of stela and estampage received by email on 11 Oct. 2019 from
Dr. Nguyễn Khánh Trung Kiên
Director - Center for Archaeology
Southern Institute of Social Sciences
49 Nguyen Thi Minh Khai, District 1, 
Hochiminh city, Vietnam

INTRODUCTION
DG: There are plenty of bilingual inscriptions from around this period.  Among those that explicitly allude to Jayavarman I (a much smaller corpus!), there is K. 493, of 579 śaka (657 CE), which by the way manifests nice clear instances of both k and r without long descendant loops (EFEO estampage n. 250).  
Cf. also K. 563 (EFEO estampage n. 414), which is similar to the Oc Eo one in its general decorative scheme at the top and bottom, its slightly less professional appearance, its use of Sanskrit and Khmer, and its use of “short” ka and ra. Cf. also K. 447, K. 49, K. 44. Of course the ka and ra with long pendentive loops can also be found, even much later in this same reign: e.g. K. 1004, EFEO estampage n. 1292.


TEXT & TRANSLATION

Kunthea Chhom, Dominic Goodall, Arlo Griffiths

Face A

I. [meter: anuṣṭubh, a and c: na-vipulā]
(1) jayaty aśeṣabhuvaṇa_dhvāntadhvaṅsanabhāskaraḥ
(2) jino vineyakamala_pravodhaprathitodayaḥ
	a. °bhuvaṇa°: read °bhuvana°.
	
He is victorious (jayati), the Buddha (jinaḥ), a sun to destroy darkness (dhvāntadhvaṅsanabhāskaraḥ) throughout the world, whose rise is proclaimed by the awakening of his lotus-like disciples (vineyakamalaprabodhaprathitodayaḥ).
	
II. [meter: anuṣṭubh, c: na-vipulā]
(3) dagdhe svatejasaivāri_vaṅśe niravaśeṣataḥ
(4)  vane (p)i ka(ṇṭa)kabhaya_m prajā yasya na lebhire
	c. The consonant part in pi looks like a ligature, but we think that this is just due to damage.  Cf. the width of the pi at the end of VIa. 

After he burnt (dagdhe) completely (niravaśeṣataḥ) the race of his enemies (arivaṅśe) merely (eva) by his fieriness (svatejasā), his subjects (prajāḥ) conceived (lebhire) no (na) fear of thorns (kaṇṭakabhaya) even [when they were] in a forest (vane ’pi).

% OR ...:  ... danger of enemies (other meaning of kaṇṭaka) ...
% Although the `burning of enemies' might in the context of the Buddha allude to the destruction of Māra, it seems more likely to us that this stanza speak about the king. The correlative yasya shows that this stanza is to go with the next two stanzas which contain yas and then tena each time denoting the king. The vocabulary (tejas, prajāḥ) also suggests that this stanza is only about the king.


III.  [meter: anuṣṭubh]
(5) caturāśramiṇā(ṁ) dharmma_samatām ānayan prajā(ḥ)
(6) yas samānārthatāyogā_t tulādaṇḍa qivābhavat·

Leading (ānayan) his subjects (prajāḥ) to a state of being in balance with the Dharma (dharmasamatām) of those belonging to the four [orthodox] walks of life (caturāśramiṇām), he became (abhavat), it seemed (iva), like the rod of a pair of scales (tulādaṇḍaḥ) [i.e. utterly impartial] because he possessed a sense of each [walk of life] being of equal value (samānārthatāyogāt).

%One could imagine a layer of meaning in which he  “was [straight] as the rod of a pair of scales because of [the fact that he was engaged in cultivating] a meditative state of awareness that all things are of equal value”.  Such a yogic awareness is spoken of as sāmarasya in Śaiva traditions, or as samarasa (e.g. in the Niśvāsa).
% Dominic: N.B. This is a strikingly "Hindu" image for a Buddhist dedication !

IV. [meter: anuṣṭubh]
(7) tena rājādhirājena _ nāmnā śrījayavarmmaṇā
(8) śrīcandanavihārāya _ dattam arthāya śāsanam·

This (tena) overlord of kings (rājādhirājena), by name Śrī Jayavarman, gave (dattam) the [following] charter (śāsanam) for the sake of wealth (arthāya) [given] for the benefit of the Śrī Candanavihāra:

V. [meter: anuṣṭubh, c: bha-vipulā]
(9) mādhave mādhave māsi _ pūrṇṇoditaniśākare
(10) [ta]thāgatasya pratimā_gamanan niyatotsavaṁ

“In spring (mādhave), in the month of Mādhava (mādhave māsi) [i.e., Vaiśākha], when the risen moon is full (pūrṇṇoditaniśākare), the procession of the image (pratimāgamanam) of the Buddha['s statue] (tathāgatasya) is to have a fixed festival (niyatotsavam).”

%AG and KC prefer `every month of Vaiśākha'.
%DG: I see that it is conceivable, but I am not convinced that it is better.  For me, it is the niyata which expresses the regularity, and not the repetition of mādhave, which I think is clever and elegant precisely because it is used in two different senses (for another consideration, see below).
%AG: why not pratimāgamanam niyatotsavam `the approaching of the Buddha image (for veneration) is to be connected with the festival' — image procession is not know to have been a cult practise in Buddhism, in Southeast Asia, is it?
%DG: This other interpretation of pratimāgamanam also seems conceivable, but again slightly less likely to me, since I would assume that the image was always there to be approached, not just on some calendrical festival. Festivals archetypically involve processions (in South India invariably so, to the point that utsava is often used to mean “procession”, e.g. in the expression utsavamūrti) and processions easily spread from faith to faith, because of imitation, since their doctrinal import may be felt to be secondary to their social value.  Here in Pondy, Catholics parade the Virgin on the annual anniversaries of the foundations of her churches, just as though she were a Viṣṇu or a Śiva (though I doubt there have ever been Gaṇikās in the Catholic processions!). For other Cambodian processions, cf. K. 290 (66–67 Buddhist, but probably calqued on a brahmanical model), K. 1222 (Śaiva), and K. 356 (a Vaiṣṇava processional image described as utsavayāyin !). 
%KC: I think the word ‘niyata’ is to qualify the festival or ceremony. Can we translate it something like ‘well-restrained’, I mean a ceremony in which the participants had to restrain themselves from sensual enjoyment and fixe their mind on the Buddha or his teaching? 
DG: This seems to me an anachronistically post-protestant interpretation ! The whole point of most festivals and festival processions (before the dreary spread of puritanism into almost all the world’s religions) was that they allowed a joyful inversion of norms.  This is, by the way, another reason for which I would like the first mādhave to mean “In Springtime !...”, a crucial time for joyous festivals all over the world from time immemorial. For me, as explained above, niyata conveys the calendrical regularity. We should be careful not to project back a post-Victorian Buddhist pietism. 

%AG to DG: we now know that the Khmer text clearly says "every year in Vaiśākha", so Kunthea and I wish again to press for translating "In every month of Mādhava (i.e., Vaiśākha)" — incidentally, would it be tried to agree on how to differentiate use of round and square brackets in translation? I am used to (...) for explanations and [...] for additions not strictly present in the original but needed to obtain a smooth and comprehensible text in translation. You also insert many more Sanskrit words into your translations than I am used to, and in doing so you cite nouns in nominative rather than stem form. Probably not worth our time to try to reach an agreement on any such trivial matters of convention...

VI. [meter: anuṣṭubh, a: na-vipulā]
(11) [qeta](s)[y](ai) kena cid api _ śraddhayā pratipāditaṁ
(12) dāsago(mah)i(ṣ)ārāma_kṣetrakarmmakarādi yat·

“[And] whatever (yat) is dedicated (pratipāditam) to this [image] (etasyai), out of faith/devotion (śraddhayā) — slaves, cows, buffaloes, gardens, fields, servants and so forth — by anybody at all (kena cid api),

%DG (with slight adaptations by AG): As for dāsa and karmakara (who are presumably servants with a different legal status from the dāsas, perhaps because they are not as completely owned), the  Śaiva author Brahmaśambhu draws this distinction in his Naimittikakriyānusandhāna. According to this text (f. 73v), when the ācārya transfers his responsibilities to his successor,  he should say:
idaṁ sthānam iyaṁ vr̥ttir iyaṁ pustakasaṁhatiḥ
amī vai bharaṇīyās tu dāsāḥ karmakarāś ca naḥ
etat sarvaṁ mayā tubhyaṁ dattam adya tvayāpi ca
pālanīyaṁ tathā samyag yathāsmābhiḥ prapālitam
`Such is the foundation; such is the revenue; such is the library; and these are the slaves and workers that it is my duty to support. All this I have given to you this day, and you should properly maintain it as I have done.'

VII.
(13) tad ahāryyam asa[ṁ]bho(g)ya_m anivāryyaṁ svakarmmasu
(14) tamandarapurādhyakṣa_bhāro ya(m avagam)[yatām·]

“that (tad) is not to be stolen (ahārya), not to be enjoyed (asambhogya), not to be withheld (anivārya) for [the accomplishment of some individual’s] own works (svakarmasu). May this (ayam) be understood (avagamyatām) to be the burden [of duty] (bhāra) of the Governor of Tamandarapura.”

%% This is probably a successor to Vidyāviśeṣa, the governor of Tamandarapura who authored K. 604 and K. 1235 in 627 CE. See Goodall 2019.

Face B
(1) qājñā vraḥ kamratāṅ· qañ· ni roḥ parihāra man·
(2) qoy· ta nā vraḥ kamratāṅ· qañ· śrīcandana-
(3) vihāra _ gan· vnok· vraḥ kamratāṅ· qañ· dai lah·
(4) gan ta saṁ paribhoga lah· _ gan· pradāna qnak·
	%saṁ paribhoga: the reproductions at our disposable make it imaginable that the dot we interpret as anusvāra is rather accidental, which would allow reading saparibhoga. Previous scholars have sometimes hesitated between saṁ paribhoga and saparibhoga (see e.g. the note in Cœdès 1936 on K. 6 line 6). But it is probably undesirable to read saparibhoga, as the expression is attested multiple times as (p)saṁ paribhoga, often with clear presence of anusvāra (see further occurrences in K. 51, 163, 426, 561, 582, 600, 818, 904, 926, 1275). 
(5) lah· pre gui siddhi ta vraḥ kamratāṅ· qañ·
(6) pre ge ta kloñña n(aṁ) qai taṁrāṅ· tve prāsāda pan·-
	%kloñña n(aṁ): it might seem easier to read kloñ ñan·, but this would deprive us of any way to imagine parallelism with the tamandarapurādhyakṣa mentioned in st. VII.
(7) ter· vraḥ ta gui pūrṇṇamī vaiśākha cracar· cnaṁ
(8) voṁ pre hau pak· tok· cmap· vnas· qaṁvi ta ge
(9) qnak· vrahha _ kñuṁ tmur· krapī daṁriṅ· tpal·
(10) sre karoṁ dok· _ voṁ tel· pre qnak· cralak·
	%cralak·: it is also possible to read ṭralak·.
	%AG: but is this an attractive option? Jenner, DPAK, recored clak/cralak, but nothing with ṭra-.
(11) [voṁ] pre pāk· slā voṁ pre knar· c(k)op· ge voṁ
(12) [tel· pre] qnak· naṁ pitai col· [ka](ṁl)uṅa qaṅgana
(13) ge [dā]r· gui ne(ḥ pa)r[i]hāra ta roḥ gui nehha
	%AG: I have the impression that more than only the syllable [dā] needs to be restored. We could restore ge ta dār, as in K. 426. Or we could restore ge ta cer here as in line 14.
(14) ge [cer· qā](jñā) vraḥ kamratāṅ· qañ· ge daṇḍa
	%AG: I have the impression that more than the syllables [cer· qā] needs to be restored. We could restore ge ta cer· qājñā, as in K. 904B.

Translation
(1–3) Order of My Lord concerning the modalities (roḥ) of management (parihāra),
	- assigning (qoy) to My Lord of the Śrī Candana Monastery some laborers of other Lords, some (laborers) who are a shared resource, (and) some who are gifts from people; 
	- enjoining that they become the exclusive property of My Lord (of the Śrī Candana Monastery); 
	- enjoining that the temple (naṁ = vnaṁ) superintendent at Taṁrāṅ build a shrine (and) organize the god's procession on the Full-moon Day of Vaiśākha, every year;
	- forbidding that he summon to break (pak), to uproot (tok), to seize (cmap), to survey (vnas), [anything], beginning with the Lord's servants, slaves, cows, buffaloes, orchards, groves, low-lying ricefields, boats;
	- forbidding permanently that the people cause damage
	- forbidding that they break areca (palms)
	- forbidding that they obstruct taxation (ckop) of others;
	- forbidding permanently that people (making?) pitai cakes enter inside the precincts (of the Lord)
Those who flout the above (gui neḥ) — the modalities of management as above —, (i.e.) those who flout the order of My Lord, are punished.
	
KHMER VOCABULARY NOTES
kloñ naṁ: also in K. 38:3, apparently the same as Adhyakṣa in Skt. 
	we need to have a note explaining how naṁ can be = vnaṁ
taṁrāṅ: also in K. 388:b.15, can it be the same place as Tamandarapura?
	cf. in Campā Panrāṅ / Pāṇḍaraṅga
pan·ter·: cf. pander (slave name) in K. 1256, B 11
cracar· cnaṁ = see cracar in K. 1004, line 6 pjuḥ vraḥ kamratāṅ qañ triṣkāla cracar tṅai, and line line 9 pūjā vraḥ kamratāṅ qañ cracar tṅai ta gi triṣkāla.
pak = break
tok = uproot
cmap = gatherer
	why did KC write cmap = cap?
vnas = dimension, measurement, surveyed land
	why did KC write vnas = vas/vās?
cralak: see Jenner, DPAK, under *clak

On col and kaṁluṅ
snāṅ naṁ pitai kaṁluṅ qaṅgaṇa vraḥ ... (K.44B:7-8), `Makers of pitai cakes within the precincts of the sanctuary ... '
riy man svāmi nivedana man sre dai mvāy jeṅ cval kamluṅ gol ukk ... (K.262S:25), `The owner informed His Majesty that another ricefield of one jeṅ came within the boundary-markers ... '.
... yok ti ta gi bhūmi noḥ ... duk cval kaṃluṅ vraḥ kralā glāṅ pratipakṣa (K.207:65-6), `... brought some earth from the said land ... [and] deposited [it] in the holy treasure chambers for the two fortnights'.

On gui neḥ, Jenner, DPAK, under gui, cites
	*gi4 neḥ* sre ta roḥ *gi neḥh* phoṅ tel kuruṅ maleṅ oy ta vraḥ kamrateṅ ʼañ śrī kedāreśvara (K.451S:15-7), `It (is) these aforesaid fields which the prince of Maleṅ has given to My Holy High Lord Śrī Kedāreśvara'.

ON TAMANDARAPURA (EMAIL PYM 14/11/2019)
Cher Arlo,
Intrigué par Tamandarapura, jamais jusqu'ici associé à Oc Eo, mais qui me rappelait quelque chose de déjà croisé, j'ai fait une petite recherche et j'ai retrouvé ce qui titillait ma mémoire.
De fait, le toponyme apparait dans deux inscriptions:
— la K.9 de Phu-huư provenant des limites sud de la Plaine des Joncs (L. Malleret, Musée Blanchard de la Brosse, Catal. général ... , I, Hanoï, 1937, n° 57, p. 70; Coedès, Inscriptions, V, p. 35-38).
— la K.604 de Sambor Prei Kuk (Coedès, Inscriptions ... , IV, p. 17, qui corrige Finot in BEFEO 1928, p.45-46 qui avait lu Tatandarapura). Coedès dit aussi que Tamandarapura est synonyme de Tamoghna). 
Tout ça est à approfondir, mais le fait qu'on trouve ce terme en trois lieux différents jette un doute sur le fait qu'il pourrait désigner la ville de Oc Eo. Dommage !

RESPONSE BY DG
It occurs to me add now that PYM doesn't take into account the considerations I advanced in my article about K. 1235 about the name Tamandarapura and about why it might occur in an inscription in Sambor Prei Kuk while being nonetheless a toponym referring to a place in the region of Oc Eo.